---
title: "33c3 - Chaos Communication Congress"
date: 2017-01-03
blurb: "Impressions and highlights from the 33rd Chaos Communication Congress, and my second time being a part of what's possibly the world's biggest non-commercial, volunteer-run hacker congress."
type: essay
draft: true
keywords: 33c3, chaos communication congress, hamburg, works for me, geek conference about hacking, hacker, activism
img: img/33c3/32c3_cover.jpg
---

A dark matter physicist is arguing with his string theorist colleauge, and says: "I don't see why you can't just untangle this whole mess". The string phycisist replies, "See, I don't think you understand the gravity of the situation".

This year at the 33rd Chaos Communication Congress, I learnt the term "standard candle". This, it turns out, does not refer to an actual candle; it's a standard unit of measure, or a base frame of reference for a measurement. This is of course particularly important if what you're measuring is the distance between distant galaxies that stretch out to the edges of our observable universe.

But what I really wanted to ask the speaker was where exactly I could buy one of these standard candles, and would they come in packs of 5?  


This year was my second time going to the Chaos Communication Congress. Yes, that [geek conference about hacking](#) I wrote about a year ago. For Anders, the Swedish dude who first convinced me to go last year, CCC is already a post-Christmas tradition, one he hasn't missed one in the past 9 years. Others I spoke to casually referred to 18c3. Clearly this place has its fans. 

CCC is a different world to the the one that constitutes our everyday lives. I say "our", but really the public at CCH is really quite diverse: privacy activists with EFF tshirts, programmers, FreeBSD purists, environmentalists, artists, science-y people, hardware hackers. And lots of people who seem to really passionate about making LEDs so funky things.

This year was no different. There's a certain relief/satisfaction in going back to something a year later and finding it as you knew. This is not going to be case next year — the Congress will move to a new location, perhaps even to a new city entirely — but this year, it felt strangely familiar. Even comforting. Like seeing an old friend. A crazy, ambitious, politically-engaged, opinionated and an all-round brilliant friend, but also a friend who could use a shower.

## Surprise Snowden

The highlight of the show was definitely a surprise visit from Edward Snowden. Yeah, that guy. Annoying inspiring. 

## Dan Wörner on ESA's Moon Mission (and then some)

## Machine Dreams (aka. things that'll go over your head)

## 